# Data science is going to change the way we teach statistics

## Abstract

We have been teaching statistics in more or less the same way since Ronald
Fisher invented the analysis of variance in the 1920s. Many of us would agree
that this teaching has not been a great success.  Standard statistical methods
such as t-tests and ANOVA rely on fairly sophisticated mathematics that we
cannot hope to teach.  There is too much mathematics to cover, and it would
quickly become obvious to the students that the mathematics is well removed
from the questions they want to answer. Until recently, we had little choice
but to resort to take-my-word-for-it general descriptions of what the common
tests are doing, followed by recipes as to when the tests can be applied and
situations in which they can be misleading.   As a result, it is not at all
surprising that many students find statistics uncomfortable and unsatisfying,
and it is difficult for them to reason about their analysis when they start to
work with their own data.

Partly in response to this problem, statistics education is undergoing
a revolution, under the banner of "data science".    Data science is a term
often used for a body of practice in data analysis, that emphasizes the role of
computing and algorithms in exploring data and testing models.  Practitioners
of data science have benefited from recent advances in programming languages
and tools, that make it much easier for students to use simple code for data
analysis.  As a result, they have rediscovered the conclusions of pioneers in
data analysis such as John Tukey and Leo Breiman.  As part of this revolution,
it has become clear that it is much easier to explain statistical methods using
simple algorithms such as simulation and randomization.  Explaining statistics
in this way gives the students a deeper and simpler way of understanding
statistical inference; it gives them the tools they need to adapt their
analysis to the data, rather than the data to the analysis. I will show some of
these tools and teaching methods, and argue, with many educators in statistics,
that we should adopt these tools and methods in our own teaching.
