# Second assignment

Last semester you dipped your toe into the waters of power and efficiency
available to you if you use R for data analysis.

You also worked in the R Notebook, that gives a reproducible record of exactly
what you did, that you can read yourself, or show to others, to describe your
analysis.

This semester, we concentrate on the most important part of data analysis,
which is data exploration and visualization.

In your third year projects, it is very likely that you will need to collect
and / or analyze some real-world data.   Real-world data is messy and
complicated, and you will need all your new R skills to work out where the
problems are, and what the data is saying.  This semester is practice for those
tools.

The exercise, as you will see, is to have a look at the real survival data from
the sinking of the Titanic.   Is it really true that women, children, and
upper-class passengers were more likely to be saved?  How about French vs
English passengers?  To do this, you will need to slice, dice and show the
data.

We are using the Titanic data to keep the focus on learning how to explore and
visualize data, rather than the biological interpretation of the results. You
will soon find that what you learn here will transfer easily to your  third
year, when you start to explore and visualize biological data sets.

As preparation for the exercise, and to get a deeper understanding of R, please
go to this free online tutorial:

* https://campus.datacamp.com/courses/statistical-inference-and-data-analysis

You will need to complete the first two chapters, which are:

* Introduction to R (this will give you some revision, and some new features);
* Introduction to Data.

After you start the tutorials, the site, DataCamp, will ask you to make free
account.

We think these two chapters will take you about 3 hours to complete, if you do
not rush, and read the instructions carefully.  They will give you the
background you need for the exercise, which is an R Notebook for you to fill
in:

* `bio240_r_2.Rmd` (in this directory).

As before, please fill in that notebook, make sure it all executes correctly,
and submit the notebook file (the file with extension ".Rmd") to Canvas.

As for last semester, this is a pass / fail test, where 70/100 is the pass
mark. It counts for 2.5% of the whole course mark.

Any questions, please direct them to \<your email here\>.

Later in the semester, I will be doing drop-in sessions if anyone wants more help with this exercise.  I will post times and dates on Canvas announcements.

Happy R'ing.
